---
layout: streets
title: Shovel-Ready NYC 25x25 Streets
subhead: How to Use Collaborative Planning to Quickly Transform Space for Cars into Space for People 
hero: https://nyc25x25.org/assets/images/image06.gif
permalink: streets

---

## Introduction

### Message from Tiffany Chu of Remix and Danny Harris of Transportation Alternatives 

Shovel-Ready NYC 25x25 Streets marks a first-of-its-kind collaboration between Transportation Alternatives (TA), the New York City-based advocacy organization with a mission to reclaim New York City’s streets from cars, and Via, the global transportation technology company. This collaboration was built with Remix, a collaborative mapping platform for transportation planning and decision-making, and inspired by NYC 25x25, a plan to convert 25 percent of space for cars in New York City into space for people by 2025. 

We hope that this partnership inspires cities around the world to not just do the work of converting car space into space for people, but to reach these aspirational goals in a more efficient and collaborative way. This report demonstrates a new way to redesign streets by modeling NYC 25x25 reallocations of street space on some of New York City’s most problematic streetscapes -- based on the know-how of Transportation Alternatives’ expert community of volunteers and activists and the power of technological collaboration that Remix offers.

What follows are tactical site-specific plans with actionable suggestions for fixing unsafe, inefficient, and inequitable streets -- but more importantly, plans built in collaboration between city planners, who are experts in street design, and community members, who are experts in their local streets. This isn’t a daydream: This is a new way of crafting collaborative street designs and is thus a bridge between the dangerous status quo of today and vision for a more livable city tomorrow. Collaboration should be a two-way street and Remix allows that, providing an easy and actionable way for city planners to speak to communities and communities to make demands of city planners. 

These designs are a microcosmic example of a vision for a multimodal future. Like cities around the world, New York City needs innovative public transportation solutions that rethink the infrastructure that shapes transportation. That starts with designs for a safer, more efficient, and more equitable use of public space, born of collaboration and shaped by collaboration, charting the path to an actionable, responsive, and iterative way forward. 

### Shovel-Ready NYC 25x25 Streets

In early 2021, Transportation Alternatives (TA) launched NYC 25x25: A Challenge to New York City’s Next Leaders to Give Streets Back to People. Backed by comprehensive research into the harm that car and truck traffic causes New Yorkers -- from public health consequences to  traffic violence to a curtailed quality of life -- NYC 25x25 proposed a radical reimagining of how public space is allocated and used in New York City. 

Today, the vast majority of New York City’s streets and sidewalks, which together make up our largest public space, are devoted to driving and the free storage of private cars -- even though the majority of New Yorkers do not own cars and most walk, bike, or take public transit. NYC 25x25 proposed a fairer share, starting with a challenge to the next leaders of New York City: Convert 25 percent of current parking and driving space into space for people by 2025. By giving just a fraction of the street back to people, New York City can save lives, transform air quality, build climate resilience into every roadbed, and provide every New Yorkers with accessible, efficient transportation and open space just a quarter-mile from their front door. 

When TA launched NYC 25x25, it was a bold vision for the future. In the months since, that vision has been endorsed by Mayor-elect Eric Adams and a coalition of more than 200 economic, educational, environmental, disability rights, labor, and public health organizations across New York City. Now, with the help of Via and Remix, TA is getting tactical, with a set of real-world designs that showcase the power of community-input in creating streets for people. 

In NYC 25x25, Via found inspiration and a common vision, and immediately wanted to get involved. Via offered to work with TA to use Remix -- Via’s innovative road-planning and mapping software -- to illustrate how NYC 25x25 could look on some especially needful New York City streets. Remix is a new tool for collecting community input on street redesigns and articulating specific, actionable, and bold plans to redesign streets in New York City for people and efficient mass transit. Guided by the on-the-ground expertise of TA’s five borough organizers and committees of volunteer activists, TA teamed up with Via, using Remix to demonstrate how collaborative planning could direct life-saving and truly equitable street redesign projects. 

Driven by data on the inequitable effects of car traffic on New York City -- including air quality, traffic violence, and congestion -- and the input of TA supporters, TA and Via chose five sites where these effects were especially present and where road conditions were especially ripe for change: Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, Jerome Avenue in the Bronx, 125th Street in Manhattan, Northern Boulevard in Queens, and Hylan Boulevard on Staten Island. With one site selected in each borough, TA organizers collected comments from the public about each site, asking what worked, what didn’t, and what felt unsafe. Together, TA and Via analyzed those comments, and used Remix to demonstrate how street design could solve the myriad of problems at each site. 

This project is intended to be a radical reinvention of street planning and advocacy, demonstrating a more collaborative and efficient way forward that cuts through red-tape to put forth actionable plans for better uses of street space quickly and easily. What follows should also serve as a library of resources for advocates, planners, and engineers looking to bring a NYC 25x25 vision to their most problematic streets, and building off earlier illustrations of what streets could be with 25 percent more space for people. Those illustrations depicted five street typologies that encompass almost every surface-level roadway in New York City: arterial streets, commerce streets, residential streets, school streets, transit streets. By examining our streets through the lens of these typologies, we can see how asphalt is an asset and how we can use road design to refocus the purpose of a street from a place for moving and storing cars to a place that serves the highest possible purpose for the people who use it. Infrastructure, including street space, should serve people, not cars. 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has driven a heightened interest in and consciousness of public space and who it is for. At this moment, with public transit ridership at record lows and traffic violence at record highs, with congestion pricing on the horizon and the effects of climate change already arrived, with a new class in the City Council and a new mayoral administration on its way, the work of NYC 25x25 continues with this playbook for creating actionable plans to convert street space for people. What follows are five site-specific, shovel-ready, community-driven solutions to five dangerous, inefficient, and inequitable streets -- each an illustrative example of a brand-new way to collaboratively and quickly redesign streets for people. 


<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/problem.html"><btn class="btn btn-primary float-end">The problem <i class="bi bi-arrow-right"></i></btn></a>